[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, you're a gym person, aren't you?
Notice I did not say gym bro.
>> Yeah, that's right. That's right. Thank
you. Aspirationally, I do go to the gym
regularly. I don't go to the gym
regularly enough to see a difference. I
think bec like I'm at the stage of life
where like every day I'm getting a
little bit closer to death and so I'm
like holding serve. I'm like sort of
holding at the same so like I know
progress but maybe I'm not regressing.
But yes,
>> I still think if you go to the gym
regularly, you're a gym person.
>> Yeah. Okay. Yeah. All right.
>> That's that's impressive.
>> Yeah. I'm gonna have less shame about
it.
>> Okay. Here's my question. Yeah.
>> Have you noticed the drinking habits of
some of your fellow gym people? Have you
noticed anyone walking around with
bottles of milk?
>> I have. I mean, I still see more people
with like the energy drinks rather than
milk. But yeah, I've definitely seen,
you know, I think like back in the day,
you know, you had these guys. I think
some of them still do with actual like
people would try to drink a gallon of
milk in a day. There's that famous um um
guy, he has a book called Starting
Strength. He's like a cult guru within
the barbell world whose name I'm
blanking on. I think he's a big like
drink a bunch of milk
>> guy.
>> If you're serious about it, you got to
mix raw eggs in with milk. That's what I
say.
>> You do? Have you done that?
>> No, I haven't. Although I did when I I
triple fractured my foot when I was in
Hong Kong and I did have a doctor who
advised me to drink a lot of milk to
build up the calcium and heal the foot.
Anyway, we're getting slightly off
topic.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. One of the milk brands that you
see a lot in gyms is something called
Fair Life.
>> Yeah, I've seen it and I actually
literally like had never thought about
what it is or but yes, I had seen this
brand.
>> Okay. So, I don't know that much about
it, but I first got kind of interested
in the company reading Austin Freric's
book Barrens. There's a whole chapter in
there about dairy barons,
>> and it's about fair oaks, which turned
into Fair Life.
>> All I know about Fair Life is that Coke
bought them. They had a big distribution
deal with Coke and we know how important
distribution is in the beverage industry
from our previous conversations on
Celsius and things like that.
>> And it's turned into this phenomenon
where Fair Life is this milk that's I
guess supposed to be healthier. It has
more protein.
>> Uh it has less lactose or no lactose, I
can't remember. Which means you can keep
it in your fridge for like a 100 days,
>> which is actually I find that useful.
So, we should talk about it because it's
also kind of kicked off this whole
protein craze.
>> Protein. Oh my god. Protein everywhere.
So, protein like uh yes, Starbucks, they
have these. Now, you can get this
protein drinks. I haven't tried them
yet. I you know,
>> when did it become a crime to just eat
normally? I got I eat some meat and I
eat some veggies and occasionally eat
some carbs and stuff like that and
whatever. But yeah, you over time it's
like different macronutrients trend,
right? So there was a while it's like
good fats, right? People were really
into fats for a while and then it's
like, oh, you need fermented stuff, so
they have to, you know, let's eat more
of that. It's good for your gut health.
But we're in like a we're certainly in a
protein bull market right now. People
really want more protein because
reasons.
>> Yeah. And what's interesting again about
Fair Life is it's making a lot of money.
That's feeding into CO's bottom line.
Share price has gone up quite a bit. And
it's also at odds with basically
everything else that's happening in the
dairy industry where you know prices
tend to be pretty low and have been kind
of stuck in a downward spiral for a long
time. Profit margins are very very thin.
So this is an outlier.
>> People are consuming less traditional
dairy. I think a lot you know at least I
don't know how big is it it is but some
of the quote alternative milks, the
almond milks of the world, the cashew
milks, soy milks probably taking some
Yeah. plain old regular dairy. No one
ever talks about, by the way, number two
milk. I feel like everyone is either
skim or fat these days because more of
the sort of like polarization of society
that no one likes a nice middle ground
milk anymore. So now apparently they
want super high protein milk, too.
>> All right, so we have the perfect guest
to discuss Fair Life and the dairy
industry in general. We're going to be
speaking with Corey Guyger. He is the
lead dairy economist with Coobank, which
is a very big lender to the industry. So
really the perfect person to speak to.
Corey, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Thoughts.
>> Well, I'm glad to be here, Tracy and
Joe.
>> So I'm going to start with a basic
question. What differentiates Fair Life
from traditional [clears throat] milk?
>> I think there's two big parts to this
protein and portability. The portability
is it's ultraasteurized and uses aseptic
packaging. So that means it you can
actually ship it without refrigeration.
And when you think about the dairy
industry, the dairy industry is the
largest refrigerated food chain in the
world really. You think as soon as we
milk a cow and we cool the milk, it's
cooled in the truck to the processing
plant and then traditional dairy
products are refrigerated all the way to
the grocery store or convenience store.
But the Fairlife story and products like
it now are uh when you go to that
aseptic packaging and ultra filtration
until you open that bottle, it's got a
lot longer shelf life. Of course, once
it's opened, you're at a the 14-day
clock starts ticking. this technology
that allows you to store milk for a long
time without refrigeration. Is this
something that's been understood for a
long time and now there's suddenly a
demand for this milk or is the
technology relatively recent and then
the industry is like oh we can because
of this technology we can market and get
people excited about a new product that
can take advantage of these
capabilities.
>> Well, Fairlife first came on the scene
in 2014. So, it's been with us about a
decade. But one of the things that the
team at Fairlife had to really perfect
was this high temperature, shorttime
pasteurization. So, you're heating the
milk up quick and then cooling it quick.
One of the things I like sharing is that
milk is nature's most perfect beverage.
You talked about it being a health
beverage. If it's nature's most perfect
beverage, that also means it's a great
place to grow bacteria. So
pasteurization, you know, over 100 years
ago, the pasteurized milk ordinance came
about and that set a national standard
so that a Wisconsin farmer could sell
milk in the Chicago market or a upstate
New York farmer could sell milk into the
in New York City under the same rules
and standards. But going to this ultra
the HTST, the high temperature shorttime
pasteurization, originally you kind of
got a burnt milk taste. So, if you're a
consumer and you're tasting that, you're
like, "Eh, it didn't hit the mark." But
now, they pro perfected that process and
you really get the flavor that you've
come to expect from a dairy milk.
>> You mentioned having to um sell into
markets, and I'm not quite sure why, but
I was reading a book about small-scale
farming from the 1950s last night, and
it was talking about if you're a
smallcale farmer and you want to get
into dairy, you have some options. One
option is you sell into a local market
that's very close to you because you
know you can't refrigerate the milk for
that long or you sell to like a cheese
factory or something like that and you
can go a little bit further sell maybe
more in bulk that sort of thing. How big
a deal was fairife's distribution deal
with Coke in its success? this idea that
now you have a beverage that can be
shipped over very very long distances,
long timelines and you have Coke
distributing it.
>> I think it was huge when you really look
at it. I if you look at the founders of
the concept of what became fair life
originally they were experimenting Mike
and Sumaclausi with a product that they
eventually called athletes milk honey
and so they were looking at finding a
health beverage for consumers in that in
that market. So there's one thing to be
innovative,
then it's distribution. And one of the
for me, I'm a grew up on a sixth
generation Wisconsin dairy farmer. One
of the obstacles always for milk has
been portability. You know, it's you
have to have this elaborate
transportation system to move it. And
I'm talking beverage milk here.
>> Yeah. And that really overcame the
situation with what Fairlife has done
with aseptic packaging and the HSUT
process to high pasteurization. It was
gamechanging.
I think this is old news, but it used to
be the case that milk prices, what's the
deal? They were like set based on your
distance from Oaklair, Wisconsin or
something like that because there was
this premise like oh we want milk very
far away and you you sell it to your
local market and it's distri explain
that that went away or something but why
was Oaklair Wisconsin this sort of
central hub for a while of the index for
pricing milk explain that
>> yes there's a number of reasons for it
actually we'll start with a little dairy
history up until about 1910 New York
[clears throat] New York was the largest
milk producing state in the United
States. Then that became Wisconsin and
obviously now America's dairy land is on
the license plates. Wisconsin actually
in the 1800 late 1800s the gentleman who
became governor of the state William
Dempster Horde secured the first
refrigerated rail car to ship Wisconsin
cheese to New York City in the 1870s.
And today, Wisconsin exports about 90%
of their milk production via cheese. And
that export could be the other 49 states
and certainly now around the world. But
because of all the cheese made in
Wisconsin and Minnesota,
Oaklair was that kind of center point
between Wisconsin and Minnesota to
establish a a base price for milk. That
went away here in about 2000 and we have
a different system. But milk is still
highly regulated under federal milk
marketing orders, which is really what
establishes milk prices.
>> Well, can you just real quickly explain
what are these or like what does that
mean? Like it's regulate because I the
prices do fluctuate. So what does that
mean that it's still highly regulated?
>> Yeah, highly regulated means that
federal milk marketing orders there's
four classes of milk. Class one would be
beverage milk. That would be the
traditional milk that you drink. And
when you come back to the fair life
story and you uh discussed that milk
fluid milk sales have been flat but
products like fair life and core power
and those are actually a mixture of
fluid milk and class two products which
traditionally have been scoopable
products like yogurt ice cream would be
in there. Sour cream would be in there
and then class three I liked sharing
little Miss Tuffet sat on her muffet
eating her curds and waist. So class 3
is cheese, curds and whey. And then
class 4 products are butter and powder.
And powder would be non-fat dry milk.
But each of these classes has different
pricing mechanisms.
And today beverage milk is priced on the
higher of class 3 or class 4. It gets
complicated and that's why I call dairy
very regulated. But these orders came
about in 1937. It was an act of Congress
and it was to ensure the orderly
marketing of milk and ensure fluid milk
in markets that didn't have a lot of
dairy cows.
>> So [clears throat]
one thing I learned from reading my old
farming book is that there are a lot of
levers that you can pull if you're again
this is for smallcale farming but there
are levers you can pull to boost profit.
So maybe you're not going to make that
much from milk itself, but you know, you
can sell the calves for ve or once the
uh dairy production starts going down
with your cows, you can sell those or
you can sell manure for fertilizer and
things like that. All these different
levers. Can you talk a little bit more
about the actual business model of a
dairy farm and where money comes from
nowadays? Because I imagine it's changed
quite a bit.
This is a dynamic space and from an over
we'll talk about the dairy farm in a
second but dairy right now has 11
billion dollar of new plant investment
in the United States and it's in a
number of categories. So there's a lot
of energy taking place and a lot of
investment. This is historic investment.
When you get to the dairy farm obviously
if you're a milking cows your number one
revenue source is milk. I would say up
until 5 years ago, 90% of your income
came from milk unless you were selling a
lot of crops. But one of the dynamic
things that have changed and it's in the
news a lot right now is beef prices.
>> And every cow has a second career as a
beef animal. About five years ago, well,
I considered the dairy cow the most
researched animal on planet Earth. We
know more about her. We have over 123
million records on her over the last
hundred years. In 2008, the science of
genomics came into the industry. I was
actually the first one to write a public
article about it. But what you do is you
take a a DNA sample from the cow. You
run her profile and you can compare it
to all this phenotypic data that 123
million records. And with about 70%
accuracy,
we can predict what that baby calf will
do as a cow. And that has changed a lot
of things in dairy. We are uh improving
butter fat and protein levels at paces
we've never seen before. And these days,
one out of four heer calavs, baby calves
that will eventually become cows have a
genomic test run on them. And that has
really changed things. Then as that took
place, gender sorted semen came into the
industry so we can uh they use lasers.
They can sort out the Y chromosomes
which make a bull calf and with about 90
to 95% accuracy produce a product that
makes dairy heer calves. So dairy
farmers were planning their
replacements. They're using science to
predict the ones. And that opened a
whole new door
to use what we call beef breeds. Think
Angus, Limousine, Charlay that we would
breed those. We'd use artificial
insemination, the original AI in
agriculture, not [laughter] artificial
intelligence, to uh inseminate the cows.
And dairy farmers are making more money
on that these days. So about five years
ago, back to Tracy's original question,
a dairy farmer was making about $1 per
hundred weight, per 100 pounds of milk
equivalent from beef sales. and say a
dairy farmer is making 18 to 20. So it
wasn't $18 to $20 per hundred weight for
milk. It wasn't a big deal. But today
that number has gone to 4450. So we're
get generating a baby black heighted
calf, an Angus calf that's destined for
a feed lot eventually is selling between
12 and $1,800 right now. Wow.
>> And so it's a big revenue stream.
>> Doesn't no matter what size your farm
is, everybody can play.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So when you're talking about improving
uh sort of butter fat and so forth, what
is going is it selective breeding that
just means that you're more likely to
get a baby cow that has high levels of
whatever you're looking for? Like what
is
>> and better production rate?
>> Yeah. what is the source of I guess
higher yields?
>> So I'm past president of holing
association USA which is the largest
dairy breed organization in the world
and that source is a bundle of metrics.
We study a lot of traits. Uh certainly
the big two would be butter fat. Well,
big three would be butter fat, protein
and milk. But we are also looking at
mastitis resistance or that you know the
ability to combat an infection in the
udder. We're looking for longevity which
is a trait we call productive life or
even daughter pregnancy rate which is a
fertility metric. So it's this bundle of
better yields from the cow and reduce
costs from uh the standpoint of health
care and those kind of things. And right
now uh if you use the best group of
holing bulls or even jersey bulls on the
next generation each year we're
improving genetics $100 per year. Prior
to genomics that number was like $13. So
this is like significant
>> wow
>> improvement and using natural uh science
and really doing a better job.
>> Sorry I started laughing at the mastitis
reference because
>> it's hilarious.
>> It's hilarious. No, one of the oldtimey
solutions for this in that old book was
using a bicycle pump to inflate the
cow's utters.
>> Huh.
>> So I'm guessing people don't do that so
much anymore. That is a true. We do not
do that anymore.
>> Okay. What about, you know, you're
talking about income that dairy farms
can generate. What's going on with the
actual input prices? Because it takes a
lot of, again, from reading this book,
takes a lot of feed, a lot of hay, a lot
of grains to actually get these cows
producing milk and also up to size if
you're going to sell them for beef. So,
the biggest costs on a dairy farm are
feed and labor. My wife's family was
actually the first to put robots in 25
years ago in the United States to start
milking their cows. So, some farmers are
using robot technology, but that's not
exactly mainstream at this point. But
look at the near-term prices for feed.
Soybean and corn grain certainly in
alalfa are some of the core
constituents. Those prices are down.
Now, that's a good thing if you're a
livestock producer. Not a great thing if
you're a row crop farmer. The other
thing these days, 37% of the US corn
crop actually goes to bofuels, ethanol.
So, there's byproduct feeds there and as
well as in the soybean space, we're
making biodiesel and one of the
byproducts of that is soybean meal. So,
the cow is a great recycler. In fact,
that four stomachs of the cow allow her
to eat a lot of byproduct feeds. And it
I've traveled I think I've been to 48
states covering the dairy industry. You
know, I've seen tomatoes and carrots
that didn't make human grade food in
California get fed to cows. I've been in
Ohio where reject jelly from Smuckers
has been fed to cows. I've been to
Canada where a farmer plows out the
driveway next door of the plant that
bakes biscuits for McDonald's and the
reject biscuits go into what is a total
mixed ration, a TMR. So, it's a big food
blender. Mixes up all the food and the
cows uh get a blended diet. So, it's
kind of a remarkable story.
>> Honestly, a cow fed on McDonald's
biscuit. Sounds pretty good.
>> Sounds great. It sounds like a cow is
just an amazing machine. All of these
discarded food products go in that
people that there no other use for
because most of us don't have four
stomachs and then every year the cows
get better at production or you get
better at producing higher producing
cows. Sounds like a great business.
>> It is remarkable and uh that's why even
though uh milk is a product that is very
consistent, every farm is different and
how every they approach it. You know,
there's very there's similarities to it,
but there's a lot of regional
differences as well.
>> Wait. Okay. So, cows might be amazing
machines. Amazing machines. Machines.
Thank you. I had to get at least one pun
in there.
>> But the dairy industry we hear has been
challenged, right? So, consumption has
been going down. I think I read
somewhere it's down 40% in the US since
1975, something like that. profit
margins are still pretty compressed.
Prices seem to be on basically it's a
race to the bottom and so you've kind of
seen a lot of consolidation of the
smaller farms into these big dairy
conglomerates. Is that the story there?
>> Well, I want to back up first though.
Dairy consumption is actually at the
highest level it's been in 40 years and
we measure that. We have some really
good USDA data on that. But if you look
at near-term, you know, we started out
talking about fair life. That's uh
Coca-Cola's newest $1 billion brand. If
you look at yogurt
year-over-year, it's up almost 10%. One
of the big stories in the yogurt
category is u certainly Shabbani. And I
would h half of the sales of yogurt
these days are Greek yogurt, which are
high protein yogurt. Another category
that's been exploding, it's we made
grandma's cottage cheese hip again. And
cottage cheese is up for cottage cheese
is great. thought it it always feels
like it should have a moment more like
Greek yogurt. It's like, "Oh, this is
cottage cheese year." Is it finally
happening?
>> It it is. And people can't make it fast
enough. I was actually talking to a
dairy processor at a Wisconsin cheese
makers meeting just last week when it
comes to yogurt. And one of his
customers said, "Can you get me more?"
And he goes, "Well, not until next
year." And he goes, "Well, just send me
whatever you can. It's those products
are very tight right now." And then
cheese consumption is at an all-time
high actually at 40 pounds per person
per year per capita. So those are some
big growth areas. What you're probably
seeing Tracy though is uh the story on
fluid milk. In the 1970s the average
American drank 30 gallons a year and now
are probably closer to 19 gallons. One
of the things for fluid milk is it's
hitched to dry breakfast cereal
compliments to one another and in fact
onethird of all fluid milk it's consumed
on dry breakfast cereal and that
category has not been going well. But
then you flip over to these the core
power which is really a high protein
milkshake and that is not actually
tracked in the fluid beverage category.
It's considered a different product. We
have seen consolidation in the dairy
industry. There's fewer dairy farms each
year. But the interesting thing is I
graduated college in 1995. While dairy
farm numbers are down, the number of
dairy cows are the same essentially
about 9.3 million. But milk production
from those cows is up 45% during that
time. just speaks to the uh efficiency
of the dairy cow and what things are
taking place on the dairy farm.
>> My intuition is correct that within the
liquid milks category, we've sort every
everything in society has become so
polarized and everyone loves extremes
and we see it in politics. We see it in
everywhere. This is well known people no
one likes the middle ground anymore
within the liquid milk category. Has
everyone sort of has gone to the extreme
ends? They want the highfat milk or the
skim leaving that good old 2% milk, the
missing middle.
>> That that's a very interesting question,
Joel. What's taking place in fluid milk?
I three big trends.
>> Okay.
>> Protein. So products like Fair Life.
>> Another one is lactosefree. A new milk
plant going up today will have membrane
technology in to do reverse osmosis. And
about everybody on the new milks are
pulling out lactose. And you got to
remember about onethird of Americans are
probably lactose intolerant, about 120
million. So let's make a product that
they uh can enjoy. And then in the
traditional milk categories, you're
absolutely right. Whole milk is about
the only one that's growing right now.
Skim, which is basically fat-ree, and
the other percentages are down. You
know, the dietary guidelines for
Americans that USDA and FDA uh do every
five years haven't really changed their
guidance on fat. But there's a lot of
research out there that said the fats uh
saturated fats found in dairy and animal
protein like beef and pork and poultry,
fish too, seafood are actually good for
you. And so there are people already
voting with their pocketbooks this
category. One thing we learned from
previous episodes on, I guess, trendy
drinks of the moment is the importance
of shelf placement in grocery stores.
And I have to admit, when I'm buying
milk at a grocery store, I basically
just buy what's at eye level. I do buy
whole milk, though.
>> Yeah,
>> that's the preference. But
how important is um placement for a
product like milk which generally would
be considered a staple and perhaps
doesn't have as much brand loyalty as
some other things.
>> Yeah, it well there's a reason in the
grocery aisle if you look at if you walk
through your grocery aisle the next time
after listening this podcast dairy is
often in the back of the store because
dairy is in like n over 95% of
households. So, it's uh a routinely
purchased product and that's part of the
uh placement situation. Now, about 5
years ago, a lot of the p plant
plant-based beverages were making
inroads and those sales are actually
down now. People consumers in my
intuition are looking for clean labels
and they want to see ingredients that
they can understand. And I think that's
been part of the changing tide in the
dairy space as well. And it's
interesting when you look at it and you
think about we're just past the 10y year
anniversary now of Coca-Cola and Select
Milk and Fairlife partnership. Now
there's others that are looking into
that space. You know PepsiCo has
announced that they're going to have a
their Propel water brand is going to
have a clear protein in it that has 20
grams of protein and they're also
reformulating their muscle milk and
they're going to have dairybased protein
in that category as well. I think when
you go to places like Costco or Walmart,
the a dairy is just not found in the
dairy aisle anymore. It's shelf stable.
It could be in the health food section.
It could be in, you know, adult
nutrition sections and those kind of
things. And so, it's expanding beyond
its traditional role because of these
high protein beverages. And also I you
if you're looking for calcium, some of
these products are, you know, in one
serving can get you 50% of that as well.
[music]
the way these trends change when it
comes to macronutrients. You know, some
I saw a tweet or something and there's
like, oh, fiber is going to be the new
protein. That's going to be the big
thing everyone wants.
>> We should encourage fiber.
>> We should probably encourage
>> more useful than I mean, Americans
consume a lot of protein already. I
don't know why we need more.
>> Apparently, we need more. But does the
industry like how long does it take the
industry to say, you know what, this is
a durable trend. We're actually going to
invest in the processing space for this
because there's got to be some risk.
Consumers are very fickle. Internet
health influencers, they may be on to
something else by next year. We're like,
oh no, you got to get whatever you go
back to low fat. That's the new hot
thing, etc. How do producers think about
their capital allocation budget when it
comes to playing on new trends within
consumption? Well, that's a large and
big question, Joe. And
>> you really look at the long-term trends
and where things are going. Tracy's
absolutely right. If you read some of
the research, fiber probably will be the
next followup, the protein. I hear
people talking about how do I put a
protein drink out there with fiber in it
and bundle the two together. You know,
when I was uh going to grade school,
there was a cheese out there called
mozzarella in the late mid 1970s that
was only at a couple pounds per capita
consumption, and now it's the most
consumed cheese in the US largely
because of its relationship with pizza.
So, these mega trends can reshape
categories. You know, in the 19 Well,
let's back up even a little further.
There was a in the 1960s there was an
organization called the Wisconsin Feeder
Pig Cooperative and how in the heck
would that be formed in Wisconsin when
Iowa is the largest hog state but what
was happening we didn't have the
technology
going back to Kurds and whey making
cheese and whey we could make cheese but
the byproduct was whey and in whey was
protein the most complete amino acid
known to humanity but cheese makers
would just said in a farmer's home would
it do something with it some would
spread it on fields. Some would feed it
to baby pigs. Well, we learned the baby
pigs would grow so fast. So, the
Wisconsin feeder pig co-op started
shipping two to three million feeder
pigs to Iowa to be finished with corn
and soybeans. Well, now we can use these
big dryers, just using drying and
harvest that way. In a lot of cheese
plants, not a lot, all the new cheese
plants are really going in with a
business model, not only to make cheese,
but to capture the whey. Whey protein
isolates are selling roughly at $10 a
pound, which is record high. And so
these business models that are taking
place and the research to build these 11
billion in new plant investment is
really how do we make more out of milk.
I think you know collagens and colostrum
and now a new one is lactopherin which
is one of the milk components that
really helps reduce inflammation.
There's some research out there, you
know, depending on the number you see,
there may be 5,000, there may be 6,300
somewhere in there unique molecules in
milk. And we are just beginning to
research that, learning what parts we
can pull apart and help humans. And
there's going to be more and more in
that space here in the coming years. And
that's all part of that investment
strategy, what's going to take place in
the plant. We're years away from some of
that. But
>> so one thing I know about farmers is
they're always complaining about
something. And no no judgment there. I'm
always complaining about something too.
Joe can attest to this. But what are the
what are the current complaints that
you're hearing the most from dairy
farms?
>> Well, right now near-term 90% of milk in
the United States is priced on multiple
component pricing. Dairy farmers would
say MCP. So and 90% of that pricing is
butter, fat, and protein. Well, if you
look at protein and butter fat as two
NASCARs on the racetrack from 2000 to
2014, the protein NASCAR always won. And
then as consumers started demanding more
fat, and remember the flavor is in the
fat. Butter fat won eight of the last 10
years. But right now, we've made so much
butter fat that butter prices are down
not only in the US, but worldwide. So
that's changed the milk checks. So that
would be if you went to a dairy meeting
right now to be like that's what's sent
milk prices down here in the last 60
days. That's one issue that is near and
top of mind. The other thing would be uh
labor. Of course it takes a lot of
people to run a dairy farm and the US
dairy industry and a lot of farmers.
Americans don't like doing dirty jobs
when it comes down to it. I on weekends
I work on our family farm. But the these
are still just like building homes. This
is very hands-on process here. And that
would be another issue that would be top
of- mind. Dairy farmers and you'll
always get a good conversation on the
weather. Farmers in general are we
always uh beholden to mother nature.
It's interesting you didn't say trade
and but partly like I get the impression
that there's always
>> a million little lawsuits going on
between Wisconsin farmers and their
friends on the other side of the border
about some rules of origin and they're
not buying enough at this. It seems like
this is one of those things that
transcends every administration. They
try to hammer it out but they're always
like sort of arguing over details.
You're not fulfilling this. You're
supposed to let in this many gallons.
who didn't. What are the core persistent
issues that American dairy farmers feel
is unfair or unidal about I guess our
dairy trading relationship with Canada?
>> Joe, that's a great point and I should
have put it in my list. Trade is top of
mind. In 1995, the US was essentially a
nonplayer in the global dairy exports.
And that's the year that NAFTA came
about. Actually NAFTA came about in 1994
and in 1995 the US dairy export council
was formed and these days about 17% of
the US milk supply or one out of seven
tankers of milk are actually exported as
either dairy products or ingredients
around the world. So it's very important
to dairy. We're actually having a strong
export year, but largely because US
dairy products and ingredients were
lower than the other two major
competitors. So the EU, the 27 countries
of the European Union are the world's
largest dairy exporters. They roughly
export 20% of their milk production.
Then the small and mighty nation of New
Zealand is the number two exporter in
the world. They have 5 million cows and
5 million people roughly in the size of
Minnesota and Wisconsin. So onethird of
their gross domestic product comes from
dairy. If you read a Oakuckland paper,
you would hear dairy at least weekly.
And then comes the US. The US's number
one e export customer is our friends
south of the border in Mexico. So the US
is about a $9 billion export market on
dairy. Mexico is at about two billion of
that. Now, Canada is a discussion to
itself. Canada's milk supply is largely
governed by a quota system. So, dairy
farmers up there purchase the right to
sell milk. And in fact, in on a Canadian
dairy farm, the quota is worth more than
everything else. It's worth more than
the cows. It's worth more than the land.
It's worth more than the equipment to
make that work. You can't have a lot of
imports come in. So, there are some
things that we send north of the border.
butter being one of them. But when you
uh hear the headlines right now, of
course, there are other things that were
agreed upon in the trade agreement the
last time, the US, Mexico, Canada trade
agreement, and one of those largely
centers on protein surprisingly.
>> H that's interesting. So if you look
into your crystal ball for the future in
the next 10 years looking at the dairy
industry, what's going to be most
important in terms of the success of a
dairy farm or profitability? Is it
technology? Is it scale and
consolidation?
Is it perhaps branding and
specialization or efficiencies in the
way you're breaking down, you know, milk
into all these various products or all
of the above? Mhm. I think that's a
two-part question because you got the
dairy farmers or dairy producers and
then you have the dairy processors.
We're going to have to use more and more
technology on the dairy farms. I think
coming back to the cow, when dairy
farmers invest in genetics, those
genetics are additive and they're so
important and if this protein booms
continues, genetics is one of the only
ways to improve it. We don't have a lot
of feeding practices in the toolbox in
that regard. Certainly AI and technology
and I'm going to say artificial
intelligence here for the farmers out
there listening will be very crucial
into this and we're going to have to use
more technology and find ways to use
robotic technology. We're already doing
some of that in rotary milking parlor.
So a rotary parlor would be like a
merrygoround that the cows go on. But
when we do milking preparation right now
some robots are putting on te dip or a
sanitizer before we milk that cow which
is important. So those are some areas
the space in a lot of dairy farmers are
also crop farmers especially growing
corn silage or alalfa would be two big
staples and you know the whole space on
farm equipment would be another area
when it comes to the processing plants.
You know, some of these new and modern
processing plants have a lot of
stainless steel and those costs are
going up. But it's that investment in
technology,
the investment in it. You know, all this
ultra filtered milk that we've been
talking about, too. You know, I was just
in a plant. There's almost 9,000 filters
in there. It's a very, it's a very clean
and good process, but it takes a lot of
investment. And
>> it's a materials heavy materials heavy
environment.
>> Yes, it is. All right, Corey, thank you
so much for coming on Odd Thoughts.
We're going to have to leave it there,
but that was so much fun. Love talking
about milk with you.
>> Yeah, that was fantastic. I learned a
bunch of stuff.
>> Thank you, Joe and Tracy.
>> Although, I will say after that
conversation, I'm not I'm not craving
liquid milk. I'm craving cheese.
>> Yeah, I'm craving cheese right now and
butter. Like a nice piece I want a piece
of bread with just like go crazy with
the butter. That's really good. Yeah,
butter and salt. I love that. Yeah.
>> It's lunch [music] time. I know.
>> Yeah, I We need Yeah. All right.
[music]
>> I really did learn a lot from that
conversation.
>> No, that was uh really helpful. This is
one of those markets like many a markets
I think where there's clearly a heavy
market component and clearly a heavy
regulatory component as well. And so I
think those are some of the hardest for
me to wrap my head around. I didn't
realize, for example, that in Canada
that you buy the right to sell dairy and
so that just that right to sell into the
market becomes a very valuable asset in
its own right. I thought that was a
great conversation. I'm also fascinated
by the fact that maybe it's just day one
in terms of learning about all of the
useful molecules in milk that can be
separated out and have some he mentioned
a few that I had never heard of, but the
idea that there's just more science
there to be done on learning what is
milk or what is in it that could be of
value. A lot of interesting stuff there.
>> No, the efficiencies and the values you
can ring out of a single product, the
cow,
>> kind of amazing.
>> Yeah.
>> So, yeah. Again, I'm gonna go back to
that book just because it's fresh in my
mind, but one of the things it was
saying is if you feed the cows a bunch
of corn,
>> then they spit out corn kernels in their
manure.
>> Oh,
>> and you can apparently actually feed
pigs on the halfeaten corn kernels.
>> It's truly disgusting.
>> In the manure. I know. But it's
efficient, Joe.
>> It's interesting. I think what do you
call it? mixed something something that
you could just like, oh, we're going to
have some old biscuits and we're going
to put some tomatoes together and it
doesn't matter the cow's stomach is
going to be able to digest it. Like that
is a really incredible machine and it is
a good reminder of how extraordinary
nature and biology are from efficiency
standpoint that if you wanted to build a
machine that could separate do the
equivalent of you know four different
stomachs etc. It would be such an
extraordinarily costly machine
>> in nature has solved this for us via
hundreds of millions of years of
evolution. It's just a very fascinating
thing to think about some of these how
efficient these processes have gotten
and then what scientists can do when
they learn more about how they work.
>> The cows are efficient themselves. I'm
still amazed at some of the labor inputs
that go into this. So, you know, cows
producing milk have to produce calves.
So, you have to
>> inseminate them. You have to take the
calves away from the cows so that the
cows will produce milk that you can
sell. And then you have to teach the
cows to like drink from either a bucket
or an artificial udder or whatever. Like
there there's a lot you have to do.
>> I'm not sure. I may have mentioned it
once or twice. When I was growing up in
the Midwest, my grandmother, her um
husband was a dairy and fruit farmer in
the middle of Michigan
>> and he was very big in the local sort of
dairy board or whatever it was, etc. And
when I was younger, I thought that was
so boring. And now I'm like get so mad.
Wish you were still around. I wish I I
have so many qu like if I he'd be one of
those things where I would like visit
him and I would like ask him two hours
of questions about the daring. Yeah.
Have him on oddlot. It's like one of
those people who will answer any of my
questions, which he would have if he was
a very patient, good guy. And I always
feel like, man, I wish a little bit
older, whatever, cuz that would have
been a very good resource.
>> Yeah, I feel the same way. My granddad
was a cattle rancher in Texas and
>> he died before I got a chance to ask him
all these questions. All I remember from
his cow industry is that he used to name
some of the cows after me and my cousin
>> and then he'd slaughter them and he'd
tell us like Tracy number three is no
[laughter] longer with us.
>> So there we go.
>> That's fun.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Dash
Bennett at Dashbot and Kale Brooks at
Kaleb Brooks. [music] For more OddLots
content, go to bloomberg.com/odlots,
where the daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And [music] if you enjoy OddLots, if you
like it when we do these agricultural
episodes, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. [music]
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely [music] adree. All
you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and [music]
follow the instructions there. Thanks
for listening.
>> [music]
[singing]
[music]